Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. Today. I'm here with a fellow youtuber. Lawrence.
Anthony has a youtube channel on Anti Natal is,
that's basically what we're going to discuss today. Anti
Natal and also some other ideas, uh, topics associated
with Antenatal is or some of the, some of
the ones people tend sometimes to associate with anti
natal. So, Lawrence, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
No, th thank thanks so much for uh, inviting
me and I've seen quite a few episodes of
the Decent. So, um, now I'm on the other
side I usually watch, but now I'm on it.
Yeah, that, that's great. So let me just ask
you perhaps I will start with a more personal
question. What got you into anti Natal? And, uh,
and, uh, when did you first get across anti
Natal is why did it interest you?
Yeah. Well, the first time I came across it
as like a term and an idea was, I
guess around sort of like 6.5, 7 years ago
now. And I was on a study exchange in
Sweden. I'd recently become vegan gotten involved in, uh,
vegan advocacy or animal rights activism. And I was
at an animal rights demonstration or it was just
after the demonstration and I overheard two people having
a conversation about anti Natal. And I, but I
wasn't involved in that conversation. Um, THAT, that's just
where I heard, like the term and the fact
that it was an idea. It was then a
few months later, I was at another animal rights
demonstration and there were a few people I was
talking to there, the topic then came up and
I was like, oh, that was that weird thing
that I, I was kind of interested by, um,
that I'd heard a few months before. So then
I had a full conversation with them and, you
know, they, they, they were anti natal lists themselves.
They explained it to me. I sort of asked
them some questions, gave them a bit of pushback
and then they sent me away with a few
sort of links to interviews to watch. Um, SO
I watched those and after that, I kind of,
I felt that I didn't have any good counter
arguments. And so I adopted it as a view
myself. Um, WHY it was appealing to me? I'm
not entirely sure. The only thing I can say
is that because I'd recently become vegan at the
time, that had been a big paradigm shift in
the way I thought. So. I think that made
me particularly then, although I think I've maintained quite
an open mind since then, but definitely around that
period, I was very open to being completely wrong
on fundamental things. Cos I'd found something that I
felt I was wrong on before. So I, you
know, I, I was probably more open than the
average person or, or than I generally am. Um,
SO that, that probably made me more sort of,
um, yeah, open to anti natal, even though it
was something I'd never heard before. And when I
first heard it, I was kind of like, I,
I find it very bizarre because I was very
much the opposite. I de, I definitely wanted Children.
Um, SO it was very strange to me to
hear that, that opposing point of view. But, yeah.
Oh, so before you got into anti natal you
wanted to have Children and then that changed?
Yeah. Exac, yeah, exactly. Um, I, I probably wasn't
much different from many other people. It's, of course,
it's very normal for people to want to have
kids and that, to be one of the sort
of main things they want to do in life.
So it was very much, it was very much
like that. I don't think I would stand out
from other people in that respect. But it, it,
it, it was a big shift and when I
started to grapple with anti natal is there was
a bit of emotional sort of friction there cos
obviously it was pulling me away from something that
I wanted to do and, uh you know, was
a big part of what I saw my future
to be. So there was a bit of emotional
discord there, but I don't wanna overplay it. I
actually think I had a relatively smooth transition. Um,
COS 01, once I feel something to be ethically
wrong, I, you know, my, my emotions tend to
come in line with that pretty quickly and, you
know, cos I just feel like I don't wanna
do that anymore. Um So yeah,
a and you mentioned veganism and that you were
already a vegan back then. So did you link
immediately veganism with Antenatal is or did it take
uh some time for you to uh notice that
perhaps there were some commonalities there in terms of,
for example, how we approach uh sentient life and
suffering and stuff like that.
Yeah, I mean, yeah, initially, um the my sort
of coming across anti Natal and being convinced by
it, it occurred in like a vegan environment, but
I don't think I necessarily linked it to veganism
particularly. It's uh yeah, it's only been since then.
Over time, I've become more aware of the, the
links between them. Um Initially, because when I was
having conversations with people about veganism and anti natal
separate conversations, you would often get the same kind
of responses back. Um So that, that was quite
uh you know, like appeals to things being natural
and stuff like this. Um OR, you know, we
have reproductive systems, we have canines, the, these sorts
of things, there were sort of similar pushbacks you
get on both. So that kind of made me
think. Well, you know, maybe, maybe there's a, maybe
there's an actual link between these two. Yeah, between
these two ideas or philosophies. Um So, and my,
my, my current understanding is that I do think
there's a strong link between them. I don't think
one necessarily mandates another. But I think in practice
the like if one person accepts one, in practice
it, it there's a pretty strong case to accept
the other. I I'm not sure if there's a
logical sort of like bridge between them in terms
of if one you have to do the other.
But I think there's a very, very strong relationship.
Yeah. No, uh there are some very curious things
that you mentioned there. And uh I mean, I'm
not sure to what extent I'm going to talk
here today about my own personal position on anti
natal is and veganism. I think I will try
to save most of it for an in an
upcoming interview with Amanda Sukhani. She's going to interview
me in October. So maybe I will save uh
I will try to save as much as I
can for that. But I mean, for example, at
a certain point, you mentioned that and I asked
directly about it that it was only after you
got into Antenatal that you eventually decided that you
no longer wanted to have kids in my personal
case. It's very interesting because, because it was way,
way before me getting across anti natal is that
I have already decided I didn't, I want to
have kids. Basically. When I was 10 years old
I really didn't want to have kids.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I, I find
that, um, like that is something that, uh, is
relatively common in anti natal circles. And I think
it's probably because if someone's already decided that they
don't want Children, then like one of the, I
think one of the biggest barriers to people thinking
clearly about anti natal is that it's, it's telling
them something they deeply wanna do is ethically wrong.
But if you don't wanna do that thing, then
it kind of makes the thinking process easier. There's
less emotional friction. So it's, yeah, it's not, it's,
it's not uncommon to hear that sort of story.
Yeah. And also you mentioned that when you get
across ethical ideas that you can't really dispute or
don't have good enough counterarguments to you basically just
very quickly adopt them. And for me it's more
or less the same, for example, I was also
vegan for four years. I mean, the reasons why
I stopped being vegan are mostly health related. I,
I won't get into that here. But anyway, I
decided that I would become a vegan one day
and the next day I was already eating vegan.
So,
yeah. Yeah, I, I was exactly the same. Like,
my, my shift was, was overnight and I think,
I don't know, maybe it doesn't happen with every
topic. But, um, like, generally if I find something
to be wrong I sort of have, yeah, I
don't know, like a, it and, and it accords
with some behavior I'm doing, um, or want to
do then. Yeah, I, I just, I don't know,
I just get a lot of, yeah, internal cognitive
friction.
Yeah, me, me too. So, but let me ask
you now, then what version of anti natal do
you espouse? Because there are diff slightly different versions
out there. Perhaps the most well known or the
most popular is the one by David Benatar. But
uh basically how would you characterize or describe uh
your own version of Antenatal?
Yeah. So when I first had sort of significant
conversations about anti Natal, they were primarily based around
uh or as I was discovering anti natal is
most of it was centered around the work of
David Benatar and like interviews he's given and stuff.
Um And I would say so I think there's,
there's a difference between the form of anti natal
that I find most resonates with me and the
form that would be most convincing to others. Cos
obviously different people are gonna be convinced by different
things. But the, the form of anti natal I
that resonates most with me is um is the
axe uh the antenatal conclusion that can be derived
from the axe. Asymmetry that Benatar describes. Um AND
yeah, he, I mean, he also espouses like a
senio centric form of anti natal. So I think
that um anti natal is, is about moral agents,
creating sentient beings, basically moral patients. I guess you'd
describe it as. So I know obviously, there's much
debate in antenatal circles about whether the reproduction of
wild animals uh is included within anti natal is
um I don't know if you wanted to touch
on that later, but that I see as something
separate. Um I see uh anti natal as as
being about the behavior of individuals who can make
decisions um uh and, and analyze them in a,
in a, in a moral way, right? Um So
it would include breeding of wild animals if it's
humans, breeding them, say for, you know, conservation efforts
or something like that. Um The reason I extend
it to other animals, I mean, I have a
more detailed video on my channel, but in general,
it's because um I think in, in many of
the sa many of the ways that humans can
be harmed, other animals can also be harmed in
those same ways, not every way identically, but I
think other animals are sentient, feel, you know, pain,
they have to different degrees emotional lives and these
are the things that we tend to care about
in humans. And so I think our care should,
um, you know, bridge the, the species barrier over
to other, other species outside of our own species.
And so just as like with veganism, you know,
I'm against, you know, killing a person for, for
a, a sandwich, I'd be against killing a, an
animal for a sandwich. And it's the same with
Antenatal, just like I'd be against breeding a human.
Um I'd be against breeding, you know, a pig
or a cow or a chicken. Um So yeah,
if you want me to cover how I see
anti Natal in any more detailed way, just, just,
you know, prompt me with the question. But that's
sort of like an overview.
Yeah, great. No. And since you mentioned the asymmetry
argument, uh I would like to get into that.
I have these questions for later, but perhaps let's
go ahead with it. Now. Um It actually the
asymmetry argument is one argument that when I first
got across Bennet's work was very convincing to me,
but over time, I, I think that it is
actually weaker than it sounds uh w when you
first hear it because I mean, basically, and also
for, for the audience to know the asymmetry argument
is basically about the asymmetry. Uh SOME of the
asymmetries that we see between uh uh between being
alive and never ever and, and never even having
started alive, never, never existing And so, uh since
beings who are alive, they experience pleasure and pain,
pain, of course, is bad. Pleasure is good. And
then if you were never even born to begin
with, you don't have, you don't experience any pleasure
nor any pain. The pain is good for you
to not experience the pleasure. I mean, since you
don't even exist, it basically doesn't matter. I mean,
it's more or less along those lines. Right. So,
but, but one thing that I find a bit
weird now is that when we are talking about
a person or another kind of sentient being who
never existed to begin with it. I mean, it's,
it sounds a bit weird because we're basically talking
about, we, we're not talking about and anyone, right?
I mean, not existing, it's not uh I mean,
let me try to explain it in, in another
way. So, I mean, if someone doesn't exist, I,
I understand she wouldn't experience pain or pleasure, but
there wouldn't be anyone to not experience that pain,
that pain and that pleasure, you know. So, I
it's more that I think I nowadays I think
that it sounds a bit weird to me to,
to talk in those terms. And also uh for
other people who are not even convinced by anti
natal is or haven't been exposed to anti Natal,
it would also sound uh like AAA weird argument
to basically to be talking about things that aren't
even there someone who doesn't exist, but at the
same time, uh as some as the benefit of
not experiencing. So, I, I don't know if I
was clear here that, I mean, my argument is
a little bit convoluted, I think.
No, no. So, I, I actually, when you started
speaking, I actually thought you were going to go
down a slightly different road because, um, when, so
11 thing I found when I've spoken to people
about the Ax asymmetry is that often it pretty
much comes down to what like the intuitions and
the values that the person holds anyway. So I
found that if someone already has the values described
by the Ax asymmetry, it it provides a sort
of very neat way of describing the values that
they may not have been fully able to like,
intellectualize in their head. And that was probably the
case for me and probably the case for many
anti natal lists. But if someone doesn't already have
those values, I'm not sure how str apart from
like presenting someone with the consequences of their values
and seeing if they change as a result of
that, it's quite hard to change someone's fundamental values.
So I have, I've found that the Ax Asymmetry
argument is both like strong and weak in the
same time, like it's, it's strong in terms of
like it provides a very, um um what was
the word I even used before? I literally just
said it 30 seconds ago, it provides a neat
way of someone understanding the values they have and
consequences that it and, and sort of positions or
consequences it may lead to. But as a t,
as using it as a tool to convince someone,
I don't know how, um, how good it is
because often it bottoms out in because like Benatar
says, it's not a logical argument you can use
to cut, you know, catch someone out, you know,
uh like making an illogical argument on their end.
It's more just presenting, here's a set of values.
If you have them, it likely leads to this
consequence ie anti Natal. But if someone doesn't have
those values, it can be very hard to move
them from that position. So that, that's the weakness
I've sort of um seen in it. And at
the end of the day, it's like, I'm kind
of fine with that personally. Like I don't feel,
you know, one person can only do so much
if I don't convince one person, I can just
move on to the next person, et cetera, um
or try to use a different argument. But on
what you're saying about how it's a strange argument
to use because it's talking about the absence of
pain being a good thing, even whilst there's no
one there to actually actively benefit from that good.
I agree with you. I think that, um I
think it sounds very strange but I think there
are Um And I think that's because the way
that we've evolved, we've evolved to deal with things
that are physically around us and, and not philosophical
discussion. And it can often be hard for us
to sort of have discussions around things that don't
exist or never exist. That's why many people will
struggle to deal with hypotheticals. Right? When you're having
a, when you're having a discussion, I think many
of us in the anti natal sphere or people
who are sort of like interact with the anti
natalis sphere, we can often be quite used to
having philosophical discussions. But if you go out and
have and try to have a philosophical, philosophical discussion
with an average group of people and you present
a hypothetical, they will say, well, that can never
happen. So why are you even discussing it? But
that's the point of a hypothetical, that's the whole
point. This thing is hypothetical. It's not real. Um
So I agree with you. It can sound very
weird. I do think though and I think Benatar
makes this point in that. Um EVEN though something
may sound very strange if there's a peculiar, if
some, if you're talking about a case, which is
a peculiar case, a very strange case, even though
something sounds weird, it doesn't mean that it's necessarily
wrong. I can give like another peculiar case um
of something being good where there's no one in
particular who, who may be benefiting from it which
is death sometimes, right? Like, I'm sure you, I
don't know what your particular views are or if
you've interviewed people on this topic. Um, I'm sure
you have but, um, those who advocate for like
euthanasia or assisted dying, you know, often we will
refer to it as being, you know, someone may
be being better off dead if they're in a
situation where their life is, eee extremely bad and
there's no sort of prospect for recovery. It doesn't,
it doesn't sound strange to me to say that
that person is better off dead because the situation
that um is currently in existence, but, you know,
pertaining to them is, is so bad that simple
nonexistence would be a better state of affairs. It
would be, it would be a good thing, you
know, the action of, um, you know, helping them
fade out of existence, you know, obviously by, via
ethical means, um would, would be a good thing
even though that person no longer exists to actively
benefit from that. And I kind of feel like
the, the opposite. Um, CASE of never bringing someone
into existence. For me, the language doesn't sound strange.
Maybe originally it did. I, I can't really remember
in detail. Um But it, it doesn't sound strange
to me to say that it, you know, it's
good not to bring someone into existence to suffer.
Um I can maybe give like another quick example
in that. Um And this, this one, this one's
like a vegan example. So, um, it's, it's very
common for, you know, if you're doing vegan street
outreach and you're say you're presenting some footage of
a, of a farm or a slaughterhouse and you
say to the people, you know, we need to
just stop breeding these animals and, and, and this
issue will go away and the people will say,
well, then they won't, you know, come into existence,
they won't have lives and, you know, they'll never
live a life and vegans will say, yeah, good.
That's a, that's a good thing that they won't
come into existence because their lives will just be
hell. And I think in that instance it doesn't
sound so unintuitive because we recognize their lives are
gonna be so bad. I think it's maybe the
fact that when we say it's good for a
human not to come into existence, perhaps it sounds
less intuitive because the life we're imagining them to
have is not as bad as being on a
factory farm. And so perhaps we're, um, there's not
as much of a contrast for us to understand
the use of the language within. Um, BUT personally,
for me, I see it as equally valid. I
don't know if that's gonna be convincing to you
or other people. But, um, yeah, that's, that's what
I have to say.
I, I mean, you don't have to convince me
because I'm already an Antenatal just that there are
there are certain specific arguments like that when that
to me sound now a bit weird. But anyway,
another thing that is also kind of goes together
with that argument, the symmetry argument is evaluating life
as good or bad or evaluating something as negative
or positive. Do you think that, do you really
think that we can do that objectively? I mean,
that we can objectively say that whatever it is
we're talking about is absolutely negative or absolutely positive
or absolutely good or bad? Because uh I mean,
from my own perspective, and this is also a
perspective I developed over the years with some of
the conversations I have on the show. Um It,
it, it, it seems to me that different people
have different personality traits, different psychological predispositions and what
could be, what is good for someone could be
bad for another person and vice versa. So do
you think that uh what do you think about
that? And do you think that matters when it
comes to anti natal arguments?
Yeah. So I agree with you in that, I
think our experience of our own lives is of,
of course subjective. I mean, al I guess by
definition, right? Because we are the subject experiencing it.
But um al also in, in the case of
like the, as you said, the same thing can
happen to do d two different people and they
can experience it in very different way, right? Um
So I think when, when we're talking about sort
of like the human condition or it's also being
called the human predicament in the sort of pessimistic
evaluation of human life. I think it is sometimes
hard to make objective claims about the nature of
human existence or even like, or maybe it's even
harder with an individual human's existence. One because we're
not, we're not experiencing that existence. So it's very
hard to make statements about someone else's life because
they're the only one experiencing it. Um So, yeah,
I think to a degree, it is, it is
subjective. Um BECAUSE um there's a saying which I'm
probably gonna butcher, but it's, it's something like the
same person never crosses the same river twice because
either the river has changed or the person has
changed in that. Um You know, we all live
our lives and perhaps we'll go through an experience
and if we're to go through that experience, we
generally change as a person as a result of
that experience. And so if we have the same
experience in 10 years time, w we won't be
experiencing it as the same person. Cos we'll have
grown from the, the first time. But also there's
just the intervening period where other things would have
happened and we would have changed. And so, um
yeah, relating this back to, you know, the evaluation
of human existence being subjective is if we can't
even guarantee that the same individual will react to
the same stimuli in the same way, two different
times in their life, then it's, it would be
extremely hard to make accurate um um sort of
pronouncements about many different people's experience of their life.
So I 100% agree that to an extent, the
evaluation of our own lives is subjective. And I
do struggle with the idea of because I hold
a more pessimistic evaluation of, of the human condition.
But I find I, I do have this comfort
with going to someone and trying to convince them
that their life is worse than they think it
is. You know, no, you're mistaken. Your life is
actually not as good as you think it is.
Your life is actually very bad. Now, I do
think there are things we can present to people
to make them evaluate their life in a more
rational way. But at the end of the day,
it, it's very hard to me as another person
make hard and fast statements about their experience and
their condition because I'm not living it. They're the
ones living it and people will have different hedonic
set points. Um You know, for use of a
ab or to use a s sort of simpler
term like we all have different baselines. Some people
have a lower baseline, some people have a, have
a higher baseline for their general mental well being.
Um So, but just, just to cover. So I
just want to cover um, maybe just put a
very brief case for why I do generally take
a pessimistic evaluation of the human condition. And then
I can talk about the link to, to Antenatal.
Um And I'm actually, I'm actually working on a
video at the moment on this very topic. Um
So 11 reason I take the pessimistic evaluation of
human life is because I think, and Benatar describes
this and I'm sure other sort of like philosophical
pessimists have is that there are many asymmetries besides
the a one that we were talking about. But
there are many asymmetries in life that weight our
experience towards being more um more inclined to ill
being rather than well being. Um So Benatar presents
some, some examples of like, you know, the worst
pains are worse than the best pleasures are, are
good. Generally, um dissatisfaction and pain can come to
us naturally with no effort of our own. You
know, uh us putting no effort in. So one
easier example is if we were just to sit
here existing like malnourishment and thirst would obviously come
to us naturally. We don't have to put any
effort in for that stuff to come to us.
You know, eventually we may become infected by a
disease as well. Dis disease finds its way to
us. We don't have to go seek it out.
Um But we have to put effort in to
stave off these things. So we have to put
effort into finding food in the modern context that
gen context that generally means working in a job.
Um Obviously the same with water with disease. Obviously,
we need to practice like regular hygiene and things
like this and be wary about the environments or
people we surround ourselves with. Um So there are
those asymmetries, obviously, there's a, there's a, there's a
few others. Um So there's also an as asymmetry
of like injury can perform us very quickly or
we can lose knowledge very quickly with a blow
over the head. But generally, um if we're gonna
recover from an injury that often takes a lot
longer than sustaining the injury, accumulating knowledge takes a
lot longer than our ability to lose it. Like
if, if you don't actively put effort into revising
things and remembering things, you can just forget things.
You can put, like many of us can probably
relate to this idea of like in the past,
maybe 1015 years ago, we used to be really
knowledgeable about a specific thing and we used to
know all the facts and figures around it and
just the fact that we, we don't retain that
knowledge. It's not like once we get it, it's
there over time, you lose it and you have
to actively um put effort into revising your knowledge
and updating your knowledge to, to maintain that. Um
Yeah, and, and, and there's, you know, there's a
few other things in there, but it kind of
strays off the topic to relate it to anti
Natal though. I think the, the pessimistic evaluation of,
of, of human life and it being subjective, I
think it is important to anti natal cos it's
part of what informs us, viewing coming into existence
as a harm, you know, if life was so
amazing. Um, AND it was extremely hard to understand
it in a way that was pessimistic. Then maybe
the case for anti Natal would, would be much
weaker. Um The, but I'm I'm hesitant that doesn't
mean that it's as relevant for us who already
exist. So some of us actually get meaning from
studying philosophical pessimism and we find it relatable and
we enjoy discussing it and reading about it. But
whether we should be going out and trying to
convince people of philosophical pessimism in, in that, you
know, you should evaluate your life to be much
worse than it actually is, that would probably do
more harm to that person than benefit. The, the
one benefit that could come obviously is that they
may, they may have a more rational sort of
approach to understanding the human condition or rational as
I see it anyway. And so that would maybe
reduce the chances that they'd bring other people into
existence. Um But yeah, in terms of like getting
everyone to be a pessimist, I'm not sure that's
the best way to go because, you know, probably
lead to more people having uh less good lives.
But yeah,
yeah, I was also thinking that when advocating for
anti Natal is, or for example, if you are
on the street approaching people to tell them about
anti Natal, I mean, one reaction that I see
a lot is I if you tell people or
if you try to argue that life is objectively
bad, uh I, I mean, there are lots and
lots and lots of people there uh out there
that just don't agree with that at all, they
don't have that kind of experience. And uh I
mean, here it doesn't even matter much. I think
if it's because they are just uh not uh
they are just forgetting more easily, the bad things
that happened in their lives. I mean, like the
Polyana effect and stuff like that or, or if
it's really that they uh or subjectively have experienced
things as mostly good instead of mostly better. A
and uh and I think that it would probably
be better to, instead of trying to uh use
the, the objectivity argument to just tell people, hey,
look, whenever someone is born, we're basically tossing a
coin because you don't know where it will land.
But the person can have, for example, depression can
suffer from other kinds of mental illness or have
very, very negative experiences in their life. So, II
I think that that would be more convincing that
that just tell people that there are many people
out there and this is 100% true for whom
life is not worth it. And they would have
been better not being born even to begin with.
So,
yeah, I, I, so, yeah, that, that's basically sort
of, uh, the risk argument that you'd bring up
to someone in, in anti natal. Um, AND I,
I agree with you. I've done this when I've,
so, I've, I've had sort of like limited experience
doing outreach on the street around anti Natal. And,
yeah, of course, you, uh you know, a lot
of the people you will come across. Um, YOU
know, I, I do it in central London. A
lot of the people you come across. Yeah. Will
not have the same experience of life as, you
know, maybe either of us. Right. So, um, but
basically everyone knows someone who's had quite a bad
life or they're at least aware of the fact
that some people around the world or many people
around the world will have bad lives. Um, PERSONALLY
I haven't met anyone that hasn't acknowledged that. Um
And so then, yeah, you can put, like you
said, you can put forward to them. Well, given
the fact that with every new generation we create,
obviously the child, you create, you're creating, being part
of that. Some of those are going to bear
the burden of those really bad lives so that
you can create all the others that are gonna
have good lives that, you know, they never existed
to one in the first place. But, um, the
only time, oh, not the only time but the,
the main push back I get on on that
is the, is, is generally from a religious perspective.
So often if I'm talking to someone who's an
atheist or just more secular minded they will recognize.
Yeah. Ok. Yeah. You know, when you're procreating you
are taking a risk. Um, BUT when I've spoken
to, um, religious people and at Speaker's corner where
myself and some others have done some anti natal
outreach, it's, it's quite heavily dominated by religious people,
predominantly Muslims. But there are Christians and, and Jews.
Um, BUT when I speak to people from those
religious perspectives, es especially Islamic preachers. Um, WHAT they
tend to say in those cases is that, well,
those people who have very bad lives, um, the,
it's still a benefit to them because they're living
in God's image. You know, they're basking in the
glow of God. Um, AND I, if, if, even
if they have bad life, if they die as
Children, they're gonna go to heaven anyway. You know,
there's a lot of sort of glorification of the
death of Children, which I've said to them. Like,
look, if you get to a point where the
ideology you follow glorifies the death of Children, maybe
you wanna reconsider. Um But, yeah, I found in
a religious context, even the acknowledgement that some lives
are bad that doesn't tend to hold any sway.
But I think then you're in a whole another
ballpark cos you've gotta then convince someone that, you
know, the, the re, the sort of whole reality
of the universe as they understand it is, is,
is not the case. Um And that's obviously very
difficult to do and that's a separate conversation you've
gotta have with them.
Yeah. Sure. Uh And I mean, I was also
mentioning that or trying to tackle that issue, let's
say because it seems to me pretty obvious that
for some people it's mu it's much easier for
them to when they come in contact with Antenatal
is accept it right away because of their own
personal experiences because of the, the way they experience
life because they have gone through a lot of
bad things in life or they suffer from an
illness, something like that. Then someone for whom, when
she or he thinks about their own life, they
look at it as mostly positive. I mean, when
they are confronted with an argument, like life is
objectively bad or there's objectively more pain than pleasure
in life. I mean, that they're just not going
to accept it because they, they're going to say,
ok, that might be true for some people, but
it's not for me. So it
doesn't accord with their experience of reality.
Yeah. So let me ask you now about uh
death because, uh I know also that there are
different views on death among anti natal lists. I
mean, the way that you relate to pro moralism,
for example. But what, uh, what is your idea
on it? Uh, WHAT are your ideas on it?
Because I guess that, uh, another thing that I
also got recently when talking about Antenatal is with,
with another person is that who, who, at a
certain point she told me and she accepts Antenatal.
But then she asked me, oh, but why is
it then that Ben Naar and other people say
that death is a harm? I mean, if life
is so bad, why is death a harm? Basically,
that was the question she posed to me. So
what would be your answer?
Yeah. So I've got uh before I answer this
question, I, I've, I've gotta say that this is
like a topic that is still open to me.
I don't fully, I don't fully know how I
view death and I wanna be uh honest and
open about that because um I, I, I'm still,
I'm sort of pulled in both directions of because
I view death as as bad and a harm.
But I find it hard to understand if I'm
making that evaluation based on death itself or the
things that surround death, like the suffering of the
dying process, the grieving that others do and stuff
like that. And I'm still trying to understand in
my mind if I can separate those, those two
things out which I think you can do philosophically,
but I'm trying to understand my own, my own
beliefs on it. So, at the moment I still,
yeah, I still view death as, as a, as
a, as a harm as a bad thing. Um,
AND I think for the ease of communication, um,
I sort of, I mean, e even though that
is what I believe, at least currently when I'd
be communicating anti natal to someone, I think in
like if I'm talking to the average person on
the street, I would still communicate in such a
way where if death comes up, I would, I
would take the position of death being a harm
because I think that is the average view that
someone takes. And I don't think it's useful in
a conversation about anti Natal is when you're trying
to convince them about that one topic to muddy
the waters by introducing other controversial or even more
controversial views. Um But in terms of what the
person you were talking to said about, well, if
life is so bad, then why, why is death
a harm? I can understand, um, what she's saying
and life can be so bad that like I
said, someone may be better off dead, right? I
don't think that necessarily means that I don't think
that just making an evaluation that life is bad
necessarily means that death isn't a harm. It could
just be a lesser harm than continuing existing. So
you can still think that life is awful and
death is better, but it doesn't mean that death
isn't also a harm. Um, ALSO, obviously you've got
to take into account that the bad things in
life can be spread out. So I do think
there are certain things in life that are bad
that are pretty consistent all the way through life,
but there are particularly bad things that can or
will happen to people in life that are concentrated
in, in, in particular periods of life. Often they
can be towards the, you know, the elderly years,
but they can be other things as well. You
know, if someone goes through a period of, of
deep depression, that may not necessarily be a, uh,
you know, uh your age may not be relevant
to that. So it could happen anywhere in your
life. You know, there are the Children that, that
affliction happens to adults, more elderly people. Um So
I can understand the sort of question that the
person you were talking to, um, like where that's
coming from. But I think it's a slight misunderstanding
of, of the fact that you can hold one
situation ie existence is very bad, but also that,
um, and, and that death is better, but also
recognizing that that death is a harm as well.
Um But yeah, to bring it back to my
own views. Uh Yeah, at the moment I view
death as a harm. I haven't quite figured out
my intricate views on it. Um, BUT yeah, that,
that's my sort of overview.
But do you think that that is a harm?
But do you think it's also a harm if
someone decides for herself, that death is the better
way? I mean, that they just want to, to
exit life because it's unbearable or something like that.
I mean, do you think that, uh, I, I
understand that tendency that most people have to think
that, oh, if that person suffered so much that
they wanted to do when their life and they
thought it would be better to not exist anymore,
then there's something wrong about even about the debt
itself. It doesn't sound right also because we are
living beings, of course, and we have this sort
of instinct to continue on living. But uh but
would you say that if someone said, oh, look,
I, I was here for, I've been here for,
I don't know many, how many years and uh
I've experienced this, that this and that and they
have these and that kind of problem. So, uh
for me, I think it's better to just not
exist anymore to, I don't know, commit suicide or
seek medical help in the form of euthanasia or
something like that. So, in that specific case, would
you still say that death is a harm or?
Yeah. So the first thing I want to say
is that um identifying death as a harm doesn't
necessarily mean that you would always advise people against
it, of course. But yeah, in, in that, in
that instance, I do get what you mean. It's
sort of difficult to see death as a harm
because at least in that instance, it seems like
it would be the only thing that can release
you from the bad situation you're in. Um And
especially if you're able to seek um m medical
assistance in, in, in dying, you know, like assisted
dying or euthanasia. Um And you're able to achieve
an end of life that is painless. And you,
you know, you essentially like drift to sleep and
just never wake up. It is hard to see
how that could be a harm. I guess the
on the only thing I could say in support
of it being a harm is that presumably if
the individual were um able to, of course, th
this is a hypothetical, this is not like gonna
happen in reality or I don't know, maybe there
are some instances, but if someone is in a
terrible situation where they see death as the only
practical way out, if, if someone like that were
able to very easily change their conditions such that
they would then pivot to having quite a good
life and move on from the situation they're in.
I would presume that at least some of the
people would take that option over ending their life.
Um Because bo both of those options would release
you from the current suffering condition you're in. Um,
SO I guess in that way, if, if there
is an option that would be taken by someone,
but it's not available to them and death is
the only option. And that's why they're taking death.
Then perhaps we could still see death as a
harm as it's sort of like they are, they
are taking it maybe even enthusiastically, but it's under
coercive conditions, I guess, Um, not coercive from another
person, but just coercive from the sort of nature
of their existence at that point in time. But
yeah, I'll have to think about it more. I,
if, if death is a harm in that specific
condition cos may maybe, yeah, maybe it wouldn't make
sense to, to call it a harm. I'd have,
yeah, I'd have to, I'd have to think about
it some more.
Yeah. Uh, AND let me ask you about another
kind of argument that many times antenatal lists bring
to the table. And actually this one, at least
in my perspective is one of the most compelling
arguments. What do you think about the argument based
on consent? I mean, the idea that we can't
really get consent from, for example, the fetus before,
before it is born, we can't really ask the
fees or the baby you want to be born
or not. Do you want to have a life
or that time? Do you want to, to exist
or not? Uh, DO you think that that's, uh,
tends to be a strong argument. Do you have
any experience, for example, uh, using that argument when
talking with someone who is not convinced by anti
Natal is more?
Yeah. So personally, I, I do find that argument
convincing, um, as, as, as well as the others
we've spoken about in terms of it being convincing
to other people that I've sort of spoken to
about it. I think if someone is already relatively
open to anti natal is as a, as a
general idea or viewpoint, um they tend to find,
they tend to find the consent point also convincing.
I wouldn't say that I have had many conversations
with people where they've not been convinced by multiple
arguments for anti Natal is, and then I present
the consent one and they're like, oh, ok, that
one's convinced me, generally, someone is either sympathetic to
the position or not and the consent argument is
just sort of like an additional argument to convince
them. But I haven't found that if someone is
generally not sympathetic to anti Natal, they then find
the consent argument specifically convincing. Maybe there are some
philosophers that um that, that are like that because
they're thinking about it in, in a philosophical way
and they sort of find the nuances of the
consent argument much more convincing. But if you're talking
to or in my experience, talking to an average
person on the street, I don't think the consent
argument has any particular power o or sort of
influence over people that any of the other arguments
um uh may not have. Um, THAT being said,
um One, there are sort of like two misunderstandings
that I found like very people have uh quite
commonly about the consent argument. The first is that
people sort of rubbish the argument by saying, oh,
well, this is a non point because they don't
exist to be able to get consent from them.
So it's, it doesn't make sense to talk about
consent, which for me, I've never understood that. Push
back because that's the whole point is the fact
that they don't exist for you to get consent
from them is the whole point. So referring to
that as a way to push back to the
argument, but that, that is the argument. Um SO
the like whether or not an individual exists, if
you're going to do something that will impact them
directly and significantly, and you can't gain consent beforehand,
just like if someone is asleep at a party
and they're passed out, you know, you can't perform
a sexual act on them. Even though in that
case, they do exist, you still can't attain consent
from them because they're unconscious, right? And so whether
or not, you know, that person is passed out
of the party or they're a newborn baby, and
obviously they can't give consent cos they're a newborn
baby and they can't communicate in any meaningful way
or even understand the concept of consent or if
an individual doesn't exist at the point in time
you're talking about if you're gonna do something that's
gonna significantly impact them. Like for example, if I
have a newborn baby in front of me and
I sign ad ad a, a document saying that
it's OK to perform a circumcision on them. Personally,
I would, I would view that as unethical cos
you can't get the baby's consent. It doesn't matter
if you're signing that document when the baby already
exists or hasn't been born yet because you know
that the circumcision will happen to them once they
exist. So to say, if someone were to come
up to me and say, oh, well, it, you
know, you can fill in that form, it's fine.
It doesn't make sense to talk about a baby
and consent cos the baby isn't born yet that
misses the forest for the trees because the impact
that will happen, that is not consented to will
happen once they exist. Um Then another thing I
find that people misunderstand is that they sort of
assu well, maybe it's not a misunderstanding, but it's
a push back that I think isn't valid. Is
that many people will say, OK, well, we can't
secure consent from someone to bring them into existence.
But you know, the majority of people, once they
have been brought into existence, they tend to look
back on being brought into existence as like, they're
glad they were born. Right. And so they sort
of give retrospective consent. I don't find that convincing
because I've actually just released a video about this
on Stockholm Syndrome. I think once people are brought
into existence, they suffer from all manner of biases
that can lead them to accept a state of
affairs where, um, where I, I think they shouldn't,
or at least the consent they're giving is highly
tainted by biases or, you know, uh rela a
relationship to the person you've, that's brought you into
existence, which means you can't sort of make them
a, a rational assessment of, of the circumstances. Um
And uh there's an example given by Heta Hari
um in a book called I think it's called
the Limits of paternalism. I, I reference it in
the video I've just made on Stockholm Syndrome. And
basically, she says, if we're to accept this idea
that people can, um we can do something to
an individual as long as once it all comes
out in the wash, they retrospectively consent to it.
Well, that means that the government could just breed
people into facilities and trade them as some sort
of radical. As long as part of the training
is to accept the condition that the government has
put you in right now. None of us would
look at this situation and think that is ethical
for the government to do. But if we're to
accept this base this, this standard of, well, if
someone retrospectively consents to something, even after there's been
all manner of intoxicating influences, like, you know, indoctrination.
Well, like if we're to accept that as the
standard, then we've got to accept the government being
able to do things, things like this. Um So
yeah, I, I don't find the idea of retrospective
consent uh particularly convincing. Um AL also just because,
and I, and I've done a video even on,
on this idea of like the fact that most
people are glad to be born doesn't mean that
we can bring more people into existence. But it's
just the fact that if you don't create them,
there's no one missing out on the life that
they would have consented to anyway if you get
what I mean? Um So yeah, that's, yeah, that's
what I'd say to that.
Yeah. And on that point, I totally agree with
you that even when people react negatively to the
argument and they say, oh yeah, but you can
really talk about consent from someone who can't give
consent to her because she doesn't exist yet or
something like that because that's the point, right? That's
what we're, we're saying when you use that argument.
Yeah, they're just repeating the argument back to us
rather than actually making uh a sort of counter
argument. Yeah.
So we, we've already gone through, I mean, some
of the most common arguments that anti Natal lists
use to advocate for anti Natal. Do you think
that there are, or, or, or not? You think
that there are? But what would you say are
perhaps some of the most compelling arguments you've ever
heard against anti NATO?
So I've never heard for me, I've never found
any of the philanthropic arguments put against anti Natal
is convincing. So, just for anyone that's listening, that
maybe doesn't understand what that means. So d generally,
this isn't always the case, but generally people tend
to break down arguments for or against anti Natal
as sort of philanthropic or misanthropic philanthropic. Meaning the
argument is concerning the individual you're bringing into existence.
And misanthropic mean is essentially the impact of the
person you're bringing into existence, whether that's good or
bad. Um So the arguments we've been covering have,
have all been philanthropic, but a misanthropic argument could
be, for example, if you're gonna, if you're gonna
create a human being, they are likely going to
um consume, you know, many animals over the course
of their life and this is gonna create, you
know, much suffering. Um There are a range of
misanthropic arguments, but that, that's just an example. So
I've never heard a philanthropic argument against anti Natal
that has been convincing. The only arguments I've fo
the only arguments I've come across that have given
me hesitation have been uh misanthropic ones about uh
e essentially making the case in it. And there's
a sort of a variety of flavors that this
will come in. But the basic point it's making
is that if anti natal lists had their way
and we started to genuinely convince people to have
less Children, the wor the world would, we wouldn't,
it's not practical that we would reach the anti
natal ideal of extinction. We would likely just make
the world a worse place. And there are a
whole variety of reasons that they give for that.
It could be that more, you know, empathetic or
more intelligent people are gonna adopt anti Natal, which
I don't necessarily think is the case. But if
that, if that were the case, then it's gonna
mean that, you know, that the world left behind
is going to be run by people who are
more callous and maybe less intelligent. Um Another one
is if, if Antenatal gets its way humans go
extinct or just have a massively reduced population, then
uh wild animals will increase in number and, and
there will be much more suffering in, in, in
the world. Um Now, of course, there are a
whole sort of variety of assumptions that are made
by those arguments. People may see them as reasonable
or unreasonable. Um I, I'm not saying I'm convinced
by those arguments, you know, obviously I'm still an
anti Natal, but I'm just saying that were if,
if one were to find II I, if you
were to the assumptions that those arguments make, which
I actually think some of the argument, some of
the assumptions may be true. Some of them uh
may be less well founded. Um If they were
to be true, then that argument that overall we're
just making the world a worse place by, by
preaching this philosophy that has given me some hesitation.
It hasn't gotten me to the point where, like
I'm gonna stop advocating for it or I'm, you
know, going to have Children of my own or
not be an anti natal. But they've just, they've
given me hesitation and, and I've needed to think
about it. Um And the philanthropic arguments that have
been put forward. Ob obviously I've thought about them
but, you know, I'm cos otherwise it would just
be me ignoring them, but I've not found any
of them to give me r like real pause
for thought. But the misanthropic ones, um Yeah, they,
they, they've, they've given me more hesitation.
Yeah. So, uh now for a bit of a
thought experiment, let's say that someone approached you and
she told you, look, I have a button here
with me. If you press it, it, it will
be as if you never existed. I mean, you
will be wiped off existence and it would be
as if you never even existed. Everything related to
you and all of that you will cease to
exist. But uh everything related with every, everything that
you did, every person you interacted with, no one
will remember you. It will be as if you
never existed to begin with. Do you think you
would press the button?
It's extremely hard to answer the question in a
rational way because given the fact that I exist
to press the button, I will be imagining in
my head that it's basically a button that kills
me. Um, SO it, it's, it's, it's very hard
to, so I don't know how to answer the
question, but I'll answer it. It, it, I'll answer
it in a, in a slightly different way that,
yeah. So I, I find, I, I'm sure you're
aware of Amil Sharon. Uh, HE, you know that
he's sort of anti natal, sort of pessimist. Yeah.
Yeah. So there's a quote from him which resonates
with me a lot, which is something along the
lines of, um, I do not hate life nor
do I desire death. I just regret being born.
And that really resonates with me because I, I,
at least at the moment don't hate my life.
I have AAA pretty reasonable standard of living. Um,
AND I enjoy my life and I'm, I'm very
lucky in that respect cos I realize that many
people today and throughout history, in fact, probably most
people have not been in that, in that situation.
I'm in a first world country with ample resources
at my disposal. I, you know, I'm not rich
or anything but I, I have like a supermarket
down the road. How many people in history have
been able to say they have a supermarket down,
down the road and access to a modern healthcare
system and stuff. So, um, I'm in a pretty
good situation at the moment. Obviously things could change.
But, yeah, I don't, I don't hate life and
I don't, like, actively want my life to end.
I don't desire death, which is why it's hard
to answer that question about the button because it,
it, it, it's, it's sort of given that you
exist to press it. It's sort of asking you
if you'd want to end your life rather than
never start it. Um But to, to sort of
answer the question in that, in a philosophical se,
I don't know what if I would actually press
the button, but in a philosophical sense, what you're
trying to get at, I think is, um, you
know, would you prefer not to have been born?
Ie would you press the button in that case?
Yes, I think it would have been better if
I'd never come into existence. You better, concerning, concerning
me. It would have been a good thing that
I'd have never come into existence. But I think
that on like an intellectual level, not on an
emotional level, like I don't, like I said, lament
my life I don't constantly think about, I would
have been better never to have been born. Well,
actually I do think about that a lot cos
I run a youtube channel about it, but I
don't, like, actively think about it in a negative
way about my own life. Um, BUT I recognize
that never coming into existence would have been better
than coming into existence if I can put it
like that. So, it's sort of like, yes, I'd
press the button but it would feel very much
like I would be killing myself rather than never
coming into existence. But I'd be, I'd be pressing
it for the, the not being born part of
it.
Yeah, I admit that the, this thought experiment is
a bit weird because I'm asking you if you
would do something that is not the same as
death. I mean, it's very weird. We, we would
even need metaphysically speaking. We would even need a
new word for this because it, it isn't exactly
the same as death, but it sounds like that.
So, uh anyway, let, let me ask you now
about because as anti natal lists, we are all
against, uh having kids, against producing new sentient beings.
Um, HAVE you ever come across an argument put
forth by Natal list? People, people who are in
favor of having kids that is not based on
selfishness. Be because I haven't.
Yeah. Well, I guess it depends what you mean
by selfishness. So I've come across arguments people have
made for having Children that down serve to further
their own interests. But that doesn't mean I find
them just because of AAA just because an argument
isn't selfish, doesn't mean it's convincing obviously. But so
someone could make an argument about like, you know,
I'm having a child to, um, help prop up
the welfare system so that elderly people can, you
know, continue receiving care. Now, maybe you could say
that's still selfish cos that individual is gonna become
elderly. So they're propping up a system that they
will fu in the future benefit from. So maybe
it is still selfish in a way. Um I
guess the only, so the answer I'm gonna, the
answers I'm gonna give that are ones where I
don't think they're selfish. Although I still don't think
that means they're convincing or good arguments are related
to veganism. There are probably other ones but because
I move in vegan circles, these are the ones
that I'm familiar with. So it's quite common for,
to hear in vegan circles from pro Natal vegans
that we should have more Children because it will
help bolster the animal rights movement and make the
world better for animals. Basically, we can achieve animal
liberation quicker if, if vegans have lots of Children.
So whether that is true or not, we'll park
to the side. Let's just assume that is true
and then not buying into a delusion but, or,
or buying into a falsehood that I wouldn't say
is a selfish reason to have a Children. I
wouldn't say that's a good reason to have a
Children, to have Children. But IW, I wouldn't say
that was a selfish reason because it's not based,
they're not centering the reasons for creating someone around
their own desires. Um, THEY'RE centering it around trying
to benefit uh uh, another group of individuals. Now
it's com, it's complicated though because whilst someone may
espouse a reason for creating someone like that deep
down, it probably is for selfish reasons that they're
having the child because it seems pretty ridiculous to
me for someone who doesn't want Children anyway to
go, I really don't want Children. It'd be a
massive inconvenience. This is not what my preferences are,
but I'm gonna have the kid because I wanna
save a pig in, in, in a factory farm.
That probably doesn't happen. I think people will put
forward certain non selfish reasons to have Children on
t on top, they sort of stack them on
top of their already existing desire to have a
child. So I think when people have Children, generally
the f the f the core motivations are always
selfish, but they may have like a garnish of
non selfish reasons on top. Um But again, that
doesn't mean those reasons are convincing. It just, they
aren't centered around their own interests.
Yeah. So let's say that I'm a transhumanist and
I approach you and tell you, look, if we
wait 200 more years, we will get to a
point where we've been able to basically solve suffering.
No one is suffering anymore. No one has any
illnesses, everyone, whatever happens in life, they experience it
as positive. Do you think that if something like
that would happen, it would justify uh procreating for
the next 200 years? And after that, uh life
would be worth living and you would stop, be
being an Antenatal.
So personally, I wouldn't, I wouldn't think that justifies
the procreation just because those future generations didn't need
to exist in the first place. Um I think
I, I mean, I'm probably not gonna say anything
new that David Benatar hasn't says, but uh ha
hasn't said, but obviously, he says that obviously, those
intervening generations will go through suffering just to achieve
a future generation that we should be indifferent to
creating um cos if they weren't to come into
existence, no one would be deprived or harmed by
that. Obviously, it's good if they do come into
existence, it's good. They have blissful lives. But in
my view, that's not a reason to create them.
The only additional thing I'd say is that utopias
don't last forever. You can sacrifice those intervening generations
to get to a state where everyone has blissful
lives. But there's no guarantee that's gonna last forever.
You know, that presumably to in practice, get to
a state where we all live amazing blissful lives,
certain forms of genetic manipulation, certain technologies are gonna
be needed. These things can always be corrupted and
so we can get to a point where everyone
has blissful lives. But that doesn't mean history doesn't
just move one way. You know, we don't just
make progress in one direction and then we reach
the pinnacle where there's no suffering, we can slip
backwards. And there are many examples in history where
there has been a slip backwards. And I would
say, even if, even if you ignore the philanthropic
stuff or, or, or the stuff that, you know,
someone like Benatar usually talks about like we should
be indifferent or we shouldn't sacrifice the intervening generations.
It's just the fact that like utopian thinking is
very dangerous, many, many people have been killed and
tortured because of utopian thinking. And I think this
is a form of utopian thinking that we, if,
if only we can just get to this place,
things will be ok. And I just don't think
that's the case. Even if we do get to
that, that spot, that sweet spot where, where technically
people aren't harmed by coming into existence cos they
don't experience any harm. That doesn't mean that that's
guaranteed to, to, to stay that way.
So I'm going to ask you now about one
last topic. Something that came to mind my mind
right now. So what are your thoughts on extinction?
Is, I mean, do you also advocate for extinction?
Is what I mean by that? Is that of
course, if we are anti natal lists and we
don't want people to reproduce anymore, it will, it,
it would inevitably lead to the extinction of our
species. But I I'm asking you apart from that,
do you look at the potential extinction of our
species and even eventually other sentient beings as something
good?
So, so I've I've done, I've actually done a
video specifically on this. So any videos I've mentioned,
I can maybe send you a link if you
put them, I don't know if you usually do
this, but if you want to, you can put
them in the description. So yeah, and
I will also link to your channel in the
description.
Yeah, thank you. So, um I think obviously there's,
there's a strong correlation between someone being an anti
natal and someone being an extinction and some anti
natal lists sort of um sort of put their
extinction to extinction is to the forefront of how
they advocate. So I don't think if you're an
anti natal, it necessarily means you have to be
an extinction. Now, one thing I wanna make clear
is um I think that a universe with no
sentient life would be the would be the best
universe, but that doesn't mean that that's the universe
I wanna aim for now just because I think
that universe would be better than the universe that
we're currently in. Like we're now in a universe
where sentient life exists. And I kind of see
it as a Pandora's box that's been opened and
it's not gonna go away And so given that
sentient life already exists, I don't think on a
practical level or on a philosophical level, an anti
natal is committed to extinction is I'll start with
the philosophical level, then I move to the practical.
So if someone's an anti natal list, it simply
means that they're against bringing new sentient beings or
human beings depending on their flavor of antenatal into
existence. That doesn't mean they want all human or
sentient beings to go out of existence. I can
imagine a world where humans gain immortality through genetic
manipulation or some technology. There are certain species of
animal that are biologically immortal, but they can still
die from disease and stuff. But they just, they
don't like, they don't age to a point where
they, where they would die. So obviously, it's possible
and perhaps someday humans will, will sort of engineer
that into ourselves. If I given I'm an antenatal
list, I still think it would be wrong to
bring new humans into existence. But I'm not gonna,
I'm not gonna campaign against someone who wants to
become immortal. Obviously, if they become immortal and use
their own mortality to constantly create babies, then we've
got an issue but just their immortality in itself.
I've got no issue with it. It's their life,
they do with it what they want. And so
as long as they're not harming others, so I
think an anti natal would have no inherent issue
with immortality. But an extinction would, because an extinction
wants the species or all sentient life to be
gone, which would include not producing any more. And
the ones who already exist need to go away.
Now, whether that means waiting for them to die
or killing them off, that's a question for the
people who, who hold those positions. But personally, that's
why I'm not a philosophical extinction because once someone's
here, if they have autonomy over their own life
and they wanna make decisions to prolong their existence,
I got no issue with that. That's their decision.
Um And that's not for me to get involved
in. So that's the philosophical side. The practical side.
I don't, personally, I don't think anti Natal lists
should be. Um I don't think we should hide
away from a conversation about extinction. If someone wants
to bring it up, then, you know, it's a
free place. People share their views. If someone asks
me, I will give them my opinion. Like you've
just asked me now, I, I'll give you my
opinion, but I don't think conversations about extinction should
be the predominant thing that we go to when
talking about anti Natal is for a couple of
reasons. One again, I think it just buys into
utopian thinking like it's so far fetched and out
there and far away, we as individuals now have
no uh have no real influence over whether the
human race is gonna go extinct or sentient life
is gonna go extinct. And if we f and
it, it, it just elicits an emotional response from
people so that they go, oh, you want extinction
and use that to disregard everything you've said. If
you stay on the topic of Anti Natal is
one, even though it's a bizarre concept to many
people, it's probably less alienating than you saying you
want everything to go extinct or e everyone to
go extinct. And if you keep the discussion on
anti natal is you're keeping it on something that
they have direct control over the person you're talking
to has no control over whether the human race
goes extinct, but they have full control over whether
they have a child, you know, removing any other
circumstances of, you know, uh forced pregnancy and stuff
like that. Generally, if someone has control over their
reproduction, then they have full control over the decision
you're talking about. Um So, yeah, and there was
another thing I was gonna say, but I've forgotten
it. But I think tho those are some, those
are some sort of like, yeah, there's a philosophical
reason, I'm not an extinction and there's a practical
reason why I think we shouldn't make that a
predominant message in our advocacy. And also, let's be
honest, anti Natal lists are a very small group
of people who don't have significant power in society.
We probably never will because of the inherent biases
in humans from our evolution. So, trying to achieve
extinction, I just think is making the perfect the
enemy of the good type thinking. And what we
should really focus on is what tangible goods can
we do with our time and resources that we
have now while we exist and try and do
that? Um So yeah, that, that's what I'd say.
If there's anything else you wanted to explore with
extinction, then please please ask me, I don't want
to hide from anything.
No, I, I have one more question and this
will be my last one, but also related to
extinction is because there are people that when they
are confronted with the idea of human extinction, they
react in a negative way because they say that
uh as humans just by existing, we bring value
into the universe in a way because we can
create art, we can uh learn about the universe,
we can do science and all of that stuff
that without us specifically as humans. Uh I mean,
there wouldn't be anything like that anymore. II, I
mean, I, I have to say that I, it
sounds a bit weird. That kind of argument to
me. Becau because when you're saying that the UN,
uh it seems like you're saying that the universe
has interests, that the universe itself is sentient and
it would lose something if we weren't here. But
you, you yourself, do you think that it makes
for a compelling argument at all?
Per I, I don't personally just because art science,
you know, literature, these sorts of things that this
type of argument points to those only serve to
benefit sentient beings once they exist, right? Like I
don't think uh like the scientific method is an
extremely good tool to use for us to understand
the universe. But if there are no sentient beings
in the universe, that that tool has, has no
use. Um COS there's no, there's no beings in
existence to have interests that can be furthered by
that tool. The same with the piece of art,
you know, the Mona Lisa is something that we
can appreciate as an amazing work of art. Or
if you don't like the Mona Lisa, pick some
other work of art. Um, BUT if there, if
there is no one to experience the Mona Lisa,
the value is kind of lost a bit. Um,
YOU know, because there's no, there's, there's no beings
in existence to experience value. Um So, yeah, I
also find them uncompelling. I don't know if you
heard, I'm sure there's multiple people who have put
that argument forward, but I'm currently reading. Should we
go extinct? In, in fact, it's just there on
my, uh, on my bed. Exactly. Yeah. And, and
I think, I mean, I've read, obviously I've read
like several books on Anti Natal for and Against.
I think it's in this book. He puts that
argument forward a bit. Um, BUT yeah, I don't,
I don't, I don't find it convincing.
Uh Yeah, I mean, there's even a sort of
long term is version of that argument where some
people uh are claiming that even if we have
to uh make, uh I don't know how many
people suffer until we get. That is the same
sort of argument I was mentioning earlier. E even
if we have to go through another fight, years
of people of making people suffer, we should uh
be here until we get to a point where
we can, people can become immortal. And I mean,
for me that's just a, no, this argument beca
because uh I, I mean, now how many people
would they be willing to sacrifice just to get
there?
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, you know, it's,
it's the same with many things, you know, you'll
have it with utopian thinking of all types. Like
if we kill this many people cos they are
dissenters pun intended, you know, then we, we'll be
able to get to this perfect political system, whether
it is a narco capitalism or communism or whatever,
whatever utopia you want. I as long if we
just hide these people away and kill them off,
you know, cos they're ruining it, then then we
can reach this, this utopia and it's the same
sort of thing. You know, if we just get
through this many generations where these people are gonna
suffer, then we can reach this utopia and it's
just um Yeah, I think utopian thinking like there
will be things to aim for and get to
which will be valuable. But when you get to
the point where you say we need to get
to it at all costs and you think, and
you think the thing you're getting to is gonna
solve all problems, then you probably need to check,
you know, your um yeah, you need to recheck
things.
Yeah, great. So just before we go apart from
your channel, which I will be linking to down
in the description, are there any other places on
the internet that you would like to point to
where people can find you or some anti natal
list advocacy group, something like that.
Yeah. So anything I'm gonna mention is linked somewhere
on my channel, but there's my channel. Um THERE'S
a series I do called Antenatal around the world
where I talk to anti natal lists in different
countries that is also available as a podcast on,
on any podcast podcast platforms. I also run a
website called the Anti Na uh a, an anti
Natal handbook which cov again, th this is linked
on my channel, but it covers common arguments people
give against anti natal and it gives responses to
those. Um uh THERE'S uh a sort of anti
natal list slash effective altruist organization slash website that
at the moment it's just me running um called
anti Natal advocacy. There's some good information on there
and charities that are relevant to this topic people
can donate to. Um And hopefully I haven't missed
anything. I think that's everything. Um Yeah, a any
anything where I am it's linked on my channel
so people can will find the links there.
Ok, great. So look, this has been a very
fun conversation. I was looking forward to this for
a while now and I, I followed your channel
for quite some time now. I really love your
video. So thank you so much for doing this.
Thank you for having me on.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S friends, David
Sloan Wilson. Ya dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi
Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed YPJ
Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftdw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the
Ausa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Ebon, Starry,
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica,
Noi Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar, Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla.
Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all